February 5
2020 OPENING NIGHT
The opening night of our 2020 program features recent restorations of key works by two of the towering figures of post-World War II European cinema: Bernardo Bertolucci and Jacques Rivette. Both filmmakers emerged as key figures in the 1960s, each betraying and confirming their strong affinity with the history of cinema and other art forms. This program profiles two of their less widely seen but central works from this seminal period, opening with Bertolucci’s appropriately labyrinthine and mercurial adaptation of a short story by Jorge Luis Borges. Released within months of The Conformist, The Spider’s Stratagem demonstrates both the full range of Bertolucci’s work and his characteristic preoccupation with the legacies of history, place and identity. The exquisite recent restoration of Rivette’s La religieuse profiles an extraordinary central performance by Anna Karina, while also highlighting the Melbourne Cinémathèque’s overriding goal of profiling challenging works of film history in optimal conditions.
 
Wednesday February 5
6:30pm
THE SPIDER’S STRATAGEM
Bernardo Bertolucci (1970) 100 mins – Unclassified 15 +
The son of a martyred anti-fascist hero travels to a small Italian village searching for the truth behind his father’s death, only to unravel a web of myths, mysteries and lies. In this intimate, mesmeric film based on a short story by Jorge Luis Borges and exquisitely shot in vibrant shades by Franco Di Giacomo and Vittorio Storaro, Bertolucci’s delicately elusive and deftly non-linear style grapples with themes of historical legacy, cultural inheritance and the intersection of sex, violence and ideology. With Alida Valli. 35mm print courtesy of Cinecittà Luce.
 
8:25pm
LA RELIGIEUSE
Jacques Rivette (1966) 140 mins – Unclassified 15 +
Rivette’s bold second feature is a controversial adaptation of Denis Diderot’s late 18th-century novel detailing the virtual incarceration of a young woman forced to enter a convent. Initially condemned by the Catholic church, partly for its critical and honest portrayal of various high officials, Rivette’s characteristically precise, formally adventurous, devastatingly affective and physically palpable portrait of the sad fate of Suzanne Simonin (in an extraordinary incarnation by Anna Karina) is also “one of the greatest prison movies ever made” (Justin Chang).
 
February 12-26
VITTORIO DE SICA: CINEMA, ITALIAN STYLE
Vittorio De Sica (1902-1974) will forever be associated with neorealism, the movement he consolidated with a string of influential masterpieces detailing the hardships of working-class life immediately after the Second World War. Yet the actor and director, across a career spanning six decades, ranged widely in his stylistic approaches and concerns. He explored Commedia all’italiana and fabulist fantasy, and made socially incisive romantic comedies and frothy sex comedies. He also worked in Los Angeles as well as Rome and his late work, such as the elegiac triumph The Garden of the Finzi-Continis, successfully combines neorealist principles with Hollywood grandeur and technique. Born in Sora, near Rome, De Sica spent his early years in Naples. His bank-clerk father encouraged his entry into acting and by the 1930s De Sica was a matinee idol, with a debonair screen persona akin to Cary Grant’s. He would continue to act his entire life, often cheerfully taking on lightweight roles to fund his own films, while parlaying his acting talent into a directorial empathy with performers both professional and amateur. It was while acting on a film in 1935 that De Sica met screenwriter Cesare Zavattini, leading to a partnership that defined not only both men’s careers but also the neorealist movement. Of De Sica’s 35 films, Zavattini worked on the scripts of 26, a number of which appear in this season. Working with Zavattini, De Sica would direct four films that would go on to win Academy Awards for Best Foreign Language Film; in fact, the pair’s work on Shoeshine and Bicycle Thieves received the honorary awards that inaugurated the category. This season presents many of the key works of De Sica’s landmark directorial career including his defining contributions to neorealism and the peak of his iconic collaborations with Marcello Mastroianni and Sophia Loren, Marriage Italian Style.
 
Wednesday February 12
6:30pm
BICYCLE THIEVES
Vittorio De Sica (1948) 89 mins – PG
A poetic tragicomedy and a landmark of neorealism, De Sica’s most celebrated film follows a man whose bicycle – his livelihood and only salvation in depressed postwar Rome – is taken by a thief, setting off a desperate chase through the war-ravaged city. Filmed on location, this iconic film’s simple construction and unadorned style belie an aching emotional power and richly detailed moral ambiguity. Co-written with Cesare Zavattini, it was voted the greatest film of all time in the inaugural Sight & Sound critics poll and remains a powerful rumination on cycles of oppression. Courtesy of Cinecittà Luce.
 
8:10pm
MIRACLE IN MILAN
Vittorio De Sica (1951) 97 mins – G
One of the many films De Sica made in collaboration with screenwriter Cesare Zavattini, this Chaplinesque poetic fairy-tale is “posed midway between reality and fantasy” (De Sica), fusing the social and economic concerns of neorealism with a more optimistic and fantastic sensibility. Its central character, Totò (Francesco Golisano), embodies an angelic perception of the world, passing this onto the impoverished community he belongs to. This “glorious anomaly in De Sica’s career” (Stephen Harvey) is the director’s “most daring” (Michael Atkinson) movie. Courtesy of Cinecittà Luce.
 
Wednesday February 19
6:30pm
THE GARDEN OF THE FINZI-CONTINIS
Vittorio De Sica (1970) 94 mins – M
De Sica’s final great film adapts Giorgio Bassani’s monumental novel about the years leading up to the fascist destruction of the Jewish community of Ferrara. Viewed through the prism of a single, privileged family, it’s an elegiac swansong comparable with Visconti’s redolent masterpiece, The Leopard. Winning an Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film and the Golden Bear at Berlin, it features Dominique Sanda (who had just completed The Conformist for Bertolucci), Lino Capolicchio and Helmut Berger. 35mm print courtesy of Cinecittà Luce.
 
8:15pm
SHOESHINE
Vittorio De Sica (1946) 87 mins – M
In post-World War II Rome, two shoeshine boys become involved in black marketeering. De Sica’s first masterpiece is one of the defining works of neorealism and a fascinating document of a city and country still ravaged by the scars of war. Treading a fine line between stark social criticism and an almost hauntingly poetic symbolism, James Agee called it “as beautiful, moving, and heartening a film as you are ever likely to see”. Written by the great Cesare Zavattini and Sergio Amidei, amongst others, it earned an honorary Oscar. 35mm print courtesy of Cinecittà Luce.
 
Wednesday February 26
6:30pm
TWO WOMEN
Vittorio De Sica (1960) 101 mins – M
Based on Alberto Moravia’s novel, this Cesare Zavattini-scripted tale of survival in war-torn Italy in the early 1940s is one of De Sica’s most celebrated later films. Cesira (Sophia Loren) and her teenage daughter (Eleonora Brown) are on the run, fleeing the Allied bombing raids throughout Europe. This fictional story was partly based on the appalling events of May 1944 in rural Lazio, during what the Italians call the Marocchinate. Loren’s extraordinary performance won the Best Actress Oscar, the first ever for a non-English-language movie. With Jean-Paul Belmondo. Courtesy of Cinecittà Luce.
 
8:25pm
MARRIAGE ITALIAN STYLE
Vittorio De Sica (1964) 102 mins – M
One of the most famous Italian comedies of all-time stars the sizzling, irrepressible duo of Sophia Loren and Marcello Mastroianni as lovers entwined in a two-decade-long tempestuous relationship, complete with capricious attractions, illegitimate children and a fraudulent wedding. De Sica’s flamboyant and fast-paced battle of the sexes is filled with wry humour and laugh-out-loud moments, developing into a disarmingly moving work which offers piercing insight into the Neapolitan mindset. 35mm print courtesy of Cinecittà Luce.
 
March 4-18
LIGHT AND SHADOW: THE MERCURAL STARDOM OF MARLENE DIETRICH
As a trendsetter who pushed the boundaries of conventional gender performance, and a femme fatale of the silver screen, Marlene Dietrich’s (1901-1992) sexuality was provocative, as was the exotic “foreignness” she displayed in her Hollywood films. Beloved for her knack of reinventing herself, Dietrich was a woman who very consciously managed her career and fastidiously cultivated her image. In 1920s Berlin, Dietrich acted on the stage and in silent films, drawing wide appeal for the skills she developed as a chorus girl in vaudeville-style entertainment. Her breakthrough performance as Lola-Lola in The Blue Angel in 1930 brought her international acclaim, a contract with Paramount and a collaborative partner, Josef von Sternberg, who would help define her persona across the seven extraordinary features they made together like Dishonored and The Scarlet Empress. Dietrich went on to star in further classic Hollywood films such as Desire, Angel, Destry Rides Again and A Foreign Affair for key directors like Borzage, Lubitsch and Wilder. Although she still made intermittent movies like Wilder’s Witness for the Prosecution, Dietrich spent most of the 1950s to the 1970s touring the world as a marquee live-show performer, harking back (but always renewed) to the early days of her career. As an icon of popular culture, she remains a powerful signifier in an ever-larger arena of cultural discourses including performativity, gender, ageing, celebrity and sexuality.
 
Wednesday March 4
6:30pm
DISHONORED
Josef von Sternberg (1931) 91 mins – Unclassified 15 +
Based on the legendary exploits of Mata Hari, Sternberg’s extravagant reimagining of his native Vienna during World War I is a delirious but grounded mixture of irreverent historicism and romantic melodrama. One of the director’s greatest works, it features a piercingly nonchalant performance but Dietrich as an alluring sex worker and spy who betrays her country for love. This brilliantly designed and costumed (by Travis Banton) espionage tale provides a lucid portrait of a woman forced to use her sexuality in a hostile patriarchal world. Co-stars Victor McLaglen.
 
8:15pm
DESIRE
Frank Borzage (1936) 95 mins – G
Borzage’s elegant, streamlined romantic comedy in the style of Lubitsch (who co-produced) translates the latter’s sophisticated worldliness into a characteristically soulful romanticism. Dietrich stars as the vivacious, cultured jewel thief who cons a naïve automotive engineer (Gary Cooper) into smuggling a necklace from France into Spain, only for love to blossom despite their moral differences. As in many of Dietrich’s greatest performances, costume, décor, gesture and the play of light take starring roles.
 
Wednesday March 11
6:30pm
ANGEL
Ernst Lubitsch (1937) 91 mins – Unclassified 15 +
Dietrich plays the disaffected wife of a British diplomat (Herbert Marshall) who flies to Paris for the night to visit the “salon” of a Russian duchess. There she meets and falls for an attractive stranger (Melvyn Douglas) who gives her the codename “Angel”. Regarded as a significant failure on release, it has emerged as one of Lubitsch and Dietrich’s most sophisticated, penetrating and underrated works. An extraordinarily elegant and incisive portrait of the entanglements of love and sexual attraction, it is also a fascinating document of old Europe teetering on the cusp of war.
 
8:15pm
DESTRY RIDES AGAIN
George Marshall (1939) 97 mins – PG
Borrowing the title but little else from Max Brand’s novel, Marshall offers a comically subversive western with striking views on gun violence and the place of women in the genre, perhaps courtesy of one-time communist Gertrude Purcell sharing script duty. Dietrich plays a chanteuse caught between Brian Donlevy’s ruthless boss and a new sheriff – James Stewart in one of his most shrewdly guileless performances – who proves not quite as acquiescent as he’s supposed to be. Marlene’s memorable barroom fight with Una Merkel caused some consternation in its day.
 
Wednesday March 18
6:30pm
A FOREIGN AFFAIR
Billy Wilder (1948) 116 mins – PG
Wilder, Richard L. Breen and Charles Brackett’s wicked and pointed satire about a Congressional investigation into GI morals portrays bombed-out Berlin as a supremely corrupt black marketeers’ paradise. Although it stars Jean Arthur as a fish-out-of-water Congresswoman negotiating the moral and cultural quagmire of the emerging Cold War, Dietrich steals the film as a slippery, Mephisto-like chanteuse. A knowing reversal of the star’s renowned anti-fascism, it includes a wonderful score by Frederick Hollaender who also features as Dietrich’s accompanist.
 
8:40pm
I KISS YOUR HAND, MADAME
Robert Land (1929) 66 mins – Unclassified 15 +
In one of her final silent films, Dietrich stars as a divorcee in Paris luxuriating in her freedom and a circle of adoring men. This divine comedy is marked by elegant set design and the exquisite appeal of Parisian high life, beautifully captured by cinematographers Carl Drews and Gotthardt Wolf. While mostly silent, this was the first German film to use synchronised sound technology, giving a platform to established lead Harry Leidtke and the titular song. However, it is Dietrich who emerges as the clear star, displaying early signs of her extraordinary performative sensuality. 35mm print courtesy of Deutsche Kinematek.
 
March 23-April 6
CAST A DARK SHADOW: THE BEAUTIFUL SADNESS OF DIRK BOGARDE
After beginning his theatrical career in London’s West End, Dirk Bogarde (1921-1999) became one of British cinema’s most significant and richly talented actors, his distinguished star persona balancing swooning, matinee-idol good looks with an array of dark, complex, turbulent characters. Bogarde’s proclivity towards multifaceted, sometimes tortured roles can perhaps be traced to the horrors – for example, he was one of the first Allied officers to enter the Bergen-Belsen concentration camp after it was “liberated” – he witnessed during World War II, as well as his necessarily closeted homosexuality. With a sensitive, commanding demeanour, and vividly expressive eyes, Bogarde’s screen presence is both subtle and domineering. As his biographer David Huckvale writes: “If Bogarde was starring, the film was simultaneously always about him.” In this regard, it can be said that many of Bogarde’s roles well and truly belong to the actor, while often exploring the complex sexual, political and social identity of his characters. This season includes many of the landmark films of Bogarde’s mature career selected from a wealth of British and European arthouse cinema, profiling his work with six distinguished directors from Liliana Cavani and Luchino Visconti to Rainer Werner Fassbinder. It focuses, in particular, on many of his most notable roles of the 1960s and 1970s, including his indelible performances in Basil Dearden’s Victim and Joseph Losey’s The Servant, and presents a rare screening of his valedictory film, Bertrand Tavernier’s aching Daddy Nostalgie.
 
Monday March 23
6:30pm
THE SERVANT
Joseph Losey (1963) 116 mins – M
The first of three collaborations between Losey and celebrated writer Harold Pinter is an uneasy chamber drama involving the privileged Tony (James Fox) and his newly appointed manservant, Hugo (Bogarde in one of his most iconic roles). Adapted from Robin Maugham’s 1948 novel, the film’s power play is permeated with psychological and sexual tension. Winning three BAFTA awards, Losey’s landmark film garnered praise for its candid treatment of class and sexuality as well as Douglas Slocombe’s claustrophobic cinematography. With Sarah Miles.
 
8:40pm
DADDY NOSTALGIE
Bertrand Tavernier (1990) 105 mins – G
A delicate three-hander is played out between a charming but selfish man (Bogarde, in his final film), his estranged daughter (Jane Birkin) and embittered, neglected wife (Odette Laure). The sensitive screenplay by the director’s former spouse, Colo Tavernier O’Hagan, may be at least partly autobiographical; the film, like a Chekhov play, allows small details to take on a magnified significance. Composed of discrete scenes like moving photos from a private album, the film’s montage, Tavernier observed, is dictated not by plot but by emotion.
 
Monday March 30
6:30pm
THE NIGHT PORTER
Liliana Cavani (1974) 118 mins – R 18 +
Notorious upon its release, this erotic Nazisploitation film explores the sadomasochistic relationship between a former SS officer (Bogarde) and a Holocaust survivor (Charlotte Rampling) whose compulsive repetition of their past leads to them “recreating” the conditions of a concentration camp. Provocative and perverse, with dark and evocative cinematography by Alfio Contini, Cavani’s controversial film examines transgressive behaviour, love and suffering alongside the lasting social and psychological effects of fascism.  Courtesy of Cinecittà Luce.
 
8:40pm
DESPAIR
Rainer Werner Fassbinder (1978) 119 mins – M
Bogarde plays a Russian Jewish chocolatier in 1930s Germany who plots an escape to Switzerland after becoming convinced that a vagrant (Klaus Löwitsch) is a doppelgänger whose identity he can adopt – though it’s clear to all that what he’s most trying to escape is himself. In response to Tom Stoppard’s adaptation of Vladimir Nabokov’s absurd novel, a macabre tale laced with melancholy humour, Fassbinder delivers what The Guardian calls “an icy, psycho-melodramatic nightmare”, exploring themes of alienation and mental breakdown in oblique, playfully provocative ways.
 
Monday April 6
6:30pm
VICTIM
Basil Dearden (1961) 90 mins – M
Anchored by Bogarde’s searing performance, this courageous and groundbreaking “social problem” thriller – the first time the word “homosexual” was spoken in a British film – played a key role in the decriminalisation of homosexuality in Britain. Bogarde stars as a married lawyer who risks his career and marriage to investigate the blackmailing of several closeted gay men – including himself – in socially conservative early 1960s London. Like Bogarde’s character, the film’s smooth and mannered surface only partially obscures an undercurrent of anger, paranoia and injustice.
 
8:10pm
THE DAMNED
Luchino Visconti (1969) 156 mins – M
The first film in Visconti’s “German Trilogy” follows the trials and tribulations of an industrialist family who are brutally coerced into manufacturing arms for the Nazis. The film’s loose, disjointed structure and provocative, operatic and expressionistic excesses can be read stylistically as a parable of the decline of the Weimar Republic and the ensuing nationalistic lurch towards totalitarianism and fascism: an orgy that culminates in a massacre. Starring Bogarde, Ingrid Thulin and Helmut Berger, and featuring Charlotte Rampling in a supporting role. Courtesy of Cinecittà Luce.
 
April 13-29
THE BIG CARNIVAL: THE FILMS OF BILLY WILDER
In a monumental career spanning seven decades, Billy Wilder (1906­-2002) started out as a central-European émigré who spoke no English and rose to become one of the most widely celebrated writer-directors of Hollywood’s golden age. The young Wilder developed an obsession with American films while working as a freelance tabloid crime reporter in 1920s Berlin. Following Hitler’s rise to power in 1933, he found himself exiled in Paris where he directed his first film, Mauvaise graine, and from there he moved to Hollywood, where he brought an outsider’s perspective and a journalist’s eye for detail to the dark – and darkly comic – aspects of American life. Over a wildly successful career, Wilder became one of the most versatile filmmakers in Hollywood, switching freely from gritty potboilers and realist noirs to romantic melodramas and comic musicals, all defined by a sophisticated wit and crisp, clever dialogue. Themes of investigation and deception abound in his work, but he rejected genre clichés in favour of morally complicated characters and stories that deeply probed the ironies and contradictions of modern life. A lifelong reporter at heart, his restrained directorial style always reflected the primacy of storytelling and the written word to his work. “If the viewer notices direction”, he once remarked, “you have failed”. This season spans the length and breadth of Wilder’s formidable directorial career featuring key but rarely screened works including the delightful farce The Major and the Minor, the bracingly cynical Ace in the Hole, and the irreverent and autumnal, The Private Life of Sherlock Holmes.
 
Monday April 13
6:30pm
MAUVAIS GRAINE
Billy Wilder and Alexander Esway (1934) 77 mins – Unclassified 15 +
Collaborating in Paris with a group of exiles, including composer Franz Waxman and screenwriters H. G. Lustig and Max Kolpé, Wilder’s directorial debut is a playful action-comedy about a rich playboy who falls in with a ragtag gang of car thieves. Using naturalistic on-the-fly filmmaking, which included shooting on the streets of Paris with a camera mounted on a moving car, Wilder’s formal techniques, self-conscious criminals and sight gags foreshadow the nouvelle vague as well as his distinctive Hollywood style. Starring Danielle Darrieux.
 
8:00pm
THE PRIVATE LIFE OF SHERLOCK HOLMES
Billy Wilder (1970) 125 mins – PG
Originally intended to run over three hours, Wilder’s melancholy, deeply affectionate and subtly queer take on the “private life” and unpublished stories of the great detective was a passion project he had been working towards for over ten years. Brilliantly designed by Alexandre Trauner and utilising huge sets constructed at Pinewood Studios, this is Wilder’s last great film and a significant influence on latter-day adaptations such as the TV’s Sherlock. Featuring one of Miklós Rózsa’s most richly enigmatic scores it stars Robert Stephens, Colin Blakely and Christopher Lee.
 
Wednesday April 22
6:30pm
ACE IN THE HOLE
Billy Wilder (1951) 111 mins – PG
Wilder’s acerbic, lacerating wit comes to the fore in this masterful social satire about the practices of journalism, the perils of newsworthiness and the morality of the masses gathering at the scenes of tragic accidents (hence the film’s alternate title, The Big Carnival). In one of his greatest and most intense performances, Kirk Douglas plays a cynical newspaper hack who, for the sake of making front-page national news and resurrecting his career dragooned on a small-town paper, gambles with a man’s life by forestalling his rescue from a collapsed mineshaft.
 
8:35pm
KISS ME, STUPID
Billy Wilder (1964) 126 mins – PG
Dean Martin limns a comic self-portrait as a lecherous singer whose car “breaks down” in the small town of Climax, Nevada. Enter Kim Novak in full bombshell mode, closely followed by two amateur songwriters who hope Dino will make them rich. Raunchy, vulgar and undeniably funny, this is Wilder’s harshest view of the American landscape since Ace in the Hole but its “rancid atmosphere conceals the virtues of the movie’s classical structure… and deft comic timing” (J. Hoberman). Scripted by Wilder and I. A. L. Diamond, it was inevitably condemned by the Catholic Legion of Decency!
 
Wednesday April 29
6:30pm
THE MAJOR AND THE MINOR
Billy Wilder (1942) 101 mins – G
After an incredibly successful screenwriting career, Wilder’s first American feature as director includes many of his most beloved hallmarks. This audacious comedy of (sexual) manners features an array of iconic Golden-era Hollywood faces including Ray Milland and, as the street-smart city girl Susan Applegate, Ginger Rogers. Rogers’ brilliantly manufactured comedic performance is crucial to maintaining the daring charade at the narrative’s core that alternates between her impersonation of a 12-year-old girl and a grown-up woman. Co-scripted by Charles Brackett.
 
8:20pm
STALAG 17
Billy Wilder (1953) 120 mins – G
Based on a successful Broadway play written by ex-inmates of Stalag 17B, Wilder’s exquisitely detailed and sardonic adaptation provides a fascinating insight into the camaraderie, treachery, comedy and tragedy of prison life. Set during the intense 1944 Allied bombing campaign, it focuses on a group of American airmen and their attempts to uncover a spy within their midsts. A huge influence on films such as The Great Escape, it turns on the Oscar-winning performance by William Holden as a self-interested, widely distrusted recent arrival who must prove his innocence. With Otto Preminger.
 
May 6-20
“LIFE’S PARADE AT YOUR FINGERTIPS”: DOUGLAS SIRK
Best known as the director of a string of lavish Hollywood melodramas made for Universal Pictures in the 1950s, Douglas Sirk’s (1897-1987) feature-film career spanned almost 40 films between 1935 and 1959. He was a successful theatre director in Weimar Germany before transferring his passion and critical eye to the silver screen, moving from Nazi Germany to the United States in the late 1930s before working across a range of studios and independent production companies before finding a home at Universal under the supervision of producer Ross Hunter. Sirk brought to his work a strong sense of drama, form and mise en scène, creating films famous for their stylistic excesses, precisely detailed décor and loaded texts and subtexts. Celebrated by the feminist and Marxist critics of the 1970s such as Laura Mulvey and the late great Thomas Elsaesser, and championed by queer directors like Rainer Werner Fassbinder, Pedro Almodóvar and Todd Haynes, his subversive command of the various forms of melodrama and other genres remains celebrated today. The seething worlds of Sirk’s creations are strangely fascinating, endlessly entertaining and provide extraordinary portraits of particular societies, character types and moments in time. This season explores the various facets and stages in Sirk’s screen career, from his early, compromised works in the Nazi-controlled German cinema of the mid-1930s to his occupation as sojourner filmmaker elsewhere in Europe, and from his exploration of a wide variety of genres and modes of production to the extraordinary group of films upon which his contemporary reputation rests (All That Heaven Allows, A Time to Love and a Time to Die and Imitation of Life).
 
Wednesday May 6
7:00pm
IMITATION OF LIFE
Douglas Sirk (1959) 125 mins – PG
One of the great films about maternal sacrifice and race, Sirk’s swansong is celebrated as a sumptuous Hollywood melodrama nonpareil, as well as a characteristically searing critique of US materialism. This second adaptation of Fannie Hurst’s 1933 novel was made under the charge of showy producer Ross Hunter and is feted for its lush aesthetic palette, magnificent costume design and powerhouse onscreen performance by Gospel legend Mahalia Jackson. A career high for Lana Turner and Juanita Moore, it also features Sandra Dee, Susan Kohner and John Gavin.
 
9:15pm
ALL I DESIRE
Douglas Sirk (1953) 80 mins – PG
At the behest of her daughter – who has taken a lead role in the final-year high-school play – a fading vaudeville artist returns to visit the family she abandoned before pursuing her ultimately lacklustre stage career. Sirk brilliantly deploys stark black-and-white compositions and sweeping camera movements to precisely register a vivid small-town American milieu, compelling this simple family melodrama toward its heavy and moving climax. Featuring a characteristically sharp and bold lead performance by Barbara Stanwyck.
 
Wednesday May 13
7:00pm
ALL THAT HEAVEN ALLOWS
Douglas Sirk (1955) 89 mins – G
This classic Sirk melodrama (later reworked by Fassbinder as Fear Eats the Soul and Todd Haynes as Far From Heaven) shot by the incomparable Russell Metty in glorious Technicolor, features an outstanding central performance by Jane Wyman as an upper-class widow torn between worldly passion for her Thoreau-reading gardener (Rock Hudson) and the rigid social pressures, material comforts and class expectations of both her deeply conservative children and the stultifyingly picturesque New England town they live in. With Agnes Moorehead.
 
8:40pm
SHOCKPROOF
Douglas Sirk (1949) 79 mins – Unclassified 15 +
Sam Fuller and Helen Deutsch’s script follows an idealistic parole officer (Cornel Wilde) who falls for one of his charges (Patricia Knight), a “femme fatale” who wants to be a good girl – but society, and her past, just won’t let her. Sirk’s lurid melodrama teeters precariously between noir and something less readily classifiable. Undeservedly neglected, its deceptively trashy, tabloid surface mirrors the easy dismissal that the heroine suffers in the film. Charles Lawton Jr.’s meticulously framed images inspired a series of iconic works by British pop artist Richard Hamilton.
 
Monday May 18
7:00pm
BOEFJE
Douglas Sirk (1939) 94 mins – Unclassifed 15 +
46-year-old veteran stage actor Annie van Ees plays, a 12-year-old delinquent who, with his best friend and partner in crime Pietje, dreams of ditching his hometown of Rotterdam for the idealised shores of America. Sirk’s last European production before he embarked upon a career in the US was a film he made in the Netherlands whilst in exile from pre-war Nazi Germany. A Dickensian critique of the Dutch class system, with shades of Graham Greene’s Brighton Rock, Sirk explores the societal and human struggles between punitive, cynical and redemptive sensibilities. 35mm print courtesy of Eye Filmmuseum. To be introduced by Tom Ryan, author of The Films of Douglas Sirk: Exquisite Ironies and Magnificent Obsessions (2019).
 
Wednesday May 20
7:00pm
A TIME TO LOVE AND A TIME TO DIE
Douglas Sirk (1958) 132 mins – PG
This heartbreaking adaptation of Erich Maria Remarque’s anti-war novel is Sirk’s most personal film. Dedicated to the memory of the son Sirk left in Germany, it traces the life of a young soldier (John Gavin) sent to the Russian Front and forced to commit atrocities before meeting a girl while on leave. A sense of encroaching death and ruination grants poignancy to the film’s ill-fated love story and detailed portrait of everyday life in Germany during the war. Beautifully shot in ’scope by key Sirk collaborator Russell Metty, it features Remarque and Klaus Kinski in supporting roles.
 
9:25pm
APRIL, APRIL!
Douglas Sirk (1935) 82 mins – Unclassified 15 +
When a prince sends an order to the social-climbing owner of a noodle factory (Erhard Siedel) it triggers a chain reaction of mistaken identities, wild misunderstandings and hilarious deceptions. Sirk’s rarely screened first feature, made at UFA, is “a deliciously funny screwball farce” (Tom Ryan). The film features two musical numbers but is also musical in a poetic sense, with its “upstairs-downstairs” depiction of bourgeoisie and servants forming “a contrapuntal household symphony” (Katie Trumpener).
 
May 27-June 10
WILDFLOWERS: DANCING, DESIRE AND FREEDOM IN THE FILMS OF GILLIAN ARMSTRONG
One of Australia’s most successful directors, Gillian Armstrong (1950-) has built a significant profile as a filmmaker in her home country, in addition to maintaining a career internationally. Entering the industry in the 1970s, Armstrong was more than just an important part of the Australian cinema revival – with My Brilliant Career in 1979 she was the first woman to direct a major feature film in Australia for over four decades, going on to contribute significantly to the national landscape with some of its most impressive, brilliantly modern films. Spread across the realms of commercial and independent cinema, fiction and documentary, Armstrong’s films exercise a consistently sensitive sympathy with women and issues that affect them. It is this emotional and feminist trajectory, continued throughout her career, that reflects the importance of her own role as filmmaker. However, with work that spans a number of genres, it is not only Armstrong’s thematic insight that should be celebrated, but also her outstanding aesthetic skills as a director – she has a sharp sense of story, design, acting, music and rhythm. As Felicity Collins writes, her work “participates fully in the aesthetic force-field of Australian naturalism and arthouse realism”. This season of mostly celluloid prints endeavours to pay tribute to the extraordinary breadth and longevity of Armstrong’s career, and includes early shorts made while still a student, famous and underseen features, and a selection of documentaries. 
 
Wednesday May 27
7:00pm
MY BRILLIANT CAREER
Gillian Armstrong (1979) 100 mins – G
Based on Miles Franklin’s semi-autobiographical 1901 novel, Armstrong’s first feature is a milestone in Australian feminist cinema. An unknown at the time, Judy Davis won a BAFTA Award for her portrayal of a headstrong, free-spirited girl who refuses to follow convention and dreams of a better life amongst the farmlands of sun-baked rural Australia. Also features Sam Neill and Wendy Hughes. Preceded by The Roof Needs Mowing Gillian Armstrong (1971) 8 mins – G. Armstrong’s breakthrough student film is a whimsical, surreal vision of everyday life and suburban boredom. Both films courtesy of the National Film and Sound Archive, Australia.
 
9:00pm
CERTAIN WOMEN: THREE FILMS BY GILLIAM ARMSTRONG
Gillian Armstrong (1973-1980) 107 mins – Unclassified 15 +
A program of three key early Armstrong documentaries and short fictions. The Singer and the Dancer (1977) is Armstrong’s first long-form narrative starring Ruth Cracknell as a lonely older woman estranged from her daughter, finally able to find communion through a chance encounter in the countryside. In her student film, One Hundred a Day (1973), a young labourer in the 1930s finds herself in a practical quandary after discovering she is pregnant. 14’s Good 18’s Better (1980) is a sequel to Smoke & Lollies, a landmark documentary about three young girls from Adelaide. Armstrong revisits them four years later as they reach the cusp of adulthood. Prints of all three films courtesy of the National Film and Sound Archive, Australia.
 
Wednesday June 3
7:00pm
HIGH TIDE
Gillian Armstrong (1987) 101 mins – M
Eight years after the trailblazing My Brilliant Career, Armstrong and Judy Davis collaborated once more on this emotionally rich multi-generational drama. Davis plays a back-up singer who, when left stranded in a seaside village on the NSW coast, re-encounters the daughter she abandoned years earlier. Skirting clear of any hint of cheap sentimentality, care of Laura Jones’ (An Angel at My Table) penetrating script, this raw and affective film evocatively expresses the painful reality of fractured relationships. Davis and co-star Jan Adele won AFI Awards. 35mm print courtesy of the National Film and Sound Archive, Australia. Rights courtesy of Anthony I. Ginnane © 1987 SJL Productions Pty Ltd.
 
8:50pm
UNFOLDING FLORENCE: THE MANY LIVES OF FLORENCE BROADHURST
Gillian Armstrong (2006) 82 mins – PG
Armstrong’s playful documentary-drama about the larger-than-life and truly mercurial Sydney-based artist, raconteur, socialite and, most famously, wallpaper designer, Florence Broadhurst. Along with writer Katherine Thomson, Armstrong fashions a visually flamboyant portrait of an impossible to pin down personality, as well as an account of her lurid life and unsolved violent death. Followed by Gretel Gillian Armstrong (1973) 27 mins – Unclassified 15 +. This contemporary work, based on a story by Hal Porter, is the last of three films Armstrong made at AFTS that kickstarted her career. Both films courtesy of the National Film and Sound Archive, Australia.
 
Wednesday June 10
7:00pm
STARSTRUCK
Gillian Armstrong (1982) 105 mins – PG
Jo Kennedy’s debut role as an energetic singer who spends her days working behind a bar, entertaining dreams of becoming a big star. Fully embracing the category of Australian rock musicals inspired by the fantasies of classical Hollywood – with a kitschy punk twist – Armstrong’s sophomore feature remains one of her most undervalued films. Armstrong embraces the spectacle of the genre, with dazzling choreography, location cinematography around Sydney Harbour, and a soundtrack by The Swingers and Tim Finn of Split Enz. Courtesy of the National Film and Sound Archive, Australia.
 
8:55pm
LITTLE WOMEN
Gillian Armstrong (1994) 115 mins – G
Armstrong’s third American feature is the most successful filmic adaptation of the classic 1868 novel by Louisa May Alcott. With meticulous direction and magnetic performances from the ensemble cast including Susan Sarandon, Kirsten Dunst and Winona Ryder as Jo, the film is a moving interpretation of a timeless classic; its subtle charms, intelligence and warmth remaining true to the story’s heart. Preceded by Satdee Night Gillian Armstrong (1973) 17 mins - Unclassified 15+. Armstrong’s observational short follows the mundane life of a man who gets lost in the rush of Sydney’s Saturday nightlife. Prints of both films courtesy of the National Film and Sound Archive, Australia.
 
June 17-July 1
DRIFTING STATES: THE FILMS OF APICHATPONG WEERASETHAKUL
One of the most audacious and idiosyncratic directors working today, Apichatpong Weerasethakul (1970-) has crafted a strikingly singular and unnerving cinematic vision of Thai subjectivity and the contemporary world. Weerasethakul’s approach to cinema is one of bold but cool synthesis, the effect of which is often bizarre and unsettling, particularly for mainstream audiences infatuated with easy notions of realism and narrative “wholeness”. Weerasethakul’s breakout film, Mysterious Object at Noon – a documentary inspired by the surrealist game of the “exquisite corpse” – aptly sets the stage for the director’s daring yet casually synthetic approach to filmmaking. A multidisciplinary artist who also works in the gallery, Weerasethakul’s cinema is notable for its attempts to transcend the boundaries between the corporeal and ethereal, the spiritual and political, the epic and the mundane, the living and the dead. Weerasethakul’s films frequently feature states of sleep, reverie, haunting and unconsciousness, meandering between languid, earthy scenes of candid naturalism and basic tenderness and moments of quiet spectacle invoking the oneiric and supernatural. There is nothing “out of the ordinary” when a ghost or god wanders into frame – in Weerasethakul’s cinema such incidents are as mundane as eating or walking or sleeping. It would nevertheless also be a mistake to see Weerasethakul’s somnambulistic style as merely “personal”: his films openly and even brazenly tackle urgent political questions concerning Thai militarism and the nation’s internal and border conflicts. This season showcases several of Weerasethakul’s most celebrated works (Tropical Malady, Uncle Boonmee Who Can Recall His Past Lives), whilst also incorporating his offbeat productions such as The Adventures of Iron Pussy and a sample of his extensive short-film work.
 
Wednesday June 17
7:00pm
Tropical Malady
Apichatpong Weerasethkul (2004) 118 mins – Unclassified 15 +
Weerasethkul’s visionary follow-up to Blissfully Yours is one of the most remarkable and memorable films of the 2000s, firmly positioning him as one of the key auteurs of contemporary cinema. The flirtatious relationship between a soldier and another man transitions into a poetic, symbolic, experiential and ghostly journey in pursuit of a seemingly shapeshifting tiger. The extraordinary use of chiaroscuro lighting transforms the Thai jungle into a definitively cinematic world that can only be experienced on the big screen. 35mm print courtesy of the Academy Film Archive.
 
9:10pm
BLISSFULLY YOURS
Apichatpong Weerasethkul (2002) 125 mins – Unclassified 15 +
This remarkable first fiction feature established Weerasethkul’s reputation as one of the most innovative filmmakers to emerge out of Southeast Asia. Defying stylistic categorisation, the film tells the story of a love affair between a Thai nurse and a Burmese illegal immigrant who escape for a romantic picnic in the jungle, followed by an older woman they know. Winner of Un Certain Regard at Cannes, the film stunned critics and audiences with its sensual, highly unusual portrayal of romantic desire and contentment. 35mm print courtesy of The National Film and Sound Archive, Australia.
 
Wednesday June 24
7:00pm
MEKONG HOTEL
Apichatpong Weerasethkul (2012) 57 mins – Unclassified 15 +
This experimental short feature shifts between fact and fiction as a filmmaker rehearses a movie exploring the bonds between a daughter and her vampiric ghost mother. Loosely based on an earlier project Weerasethakul had abandoned titled Ecstasy Garden, the film layers looping existential storytelling, Thai folklore and contemporary political allusions. It’s also a mesmerising depiction of place and a haunting portrait of a hotel on the edge of the swollen Mekong River in northeast Thailand on the border with Laos.
 
8:10pm
THE ADVENTURES OF IRON PUSSY
Apichatpong Weerasethkul and Michael Shaowanasai (2003) 90 mins – Unclassified 15 +
One of contemporary cinema’s most meditative, spiritual directors also produced this unabashedly queer and outlandish lo-fi musical action-comedy. Pussy – a kickboxing drag superheroine and rogue pro-sex-work advocate – is assigned a deep cover special mission to take down a drug ring. Based on characters developed by Bangkok performance artist Shaowanasai, Weerasethkul’s audacious and self-consciously trashy parody of ’60s and ’70s Thai genre films invokes two of the era’s major stars, Mitr Chaibancha and Petchara Chaowarat.
 
9:50pm
MYSTERIOUS OBJECT AT NOON
Apichatpong Weerasethkul (2000) 83 mins – Unclassified 15 +
Weerasethkul’s debut feature, an unscripted documentary-fiction hybrid, follows the director and crew as they travel through the Thai countryside asking local residents to contribute to a collective story that is part folklore and part sci-fi. The indefinable result is an enigmatic assemblage of avant-garde form and popular iconography highlighting Weerasethkul’s career-long exploration of Thai culture and the outer limits of cinematic form. Courtesy of  the Cineteca di Bologna.
 
Wednesday July 1
7:00pm
(OTHER)WORDLY DESIRES: THE SHORT FILMS OF APICHATPONG WEERASETHUKAL
Apichatpong Weerasethkul (2005-2014) 93 mins – Unclassified 15 +
This special collection of eight experimental shorts, selected from Weerasethkul’s vast catalogue of work, coheres as a medley of audio-visual experiments, poetic images and sonic ideas intertwined to create the cinematic dreamscapes so unique to the artist. Reflecting on ritual and landscape, these films contemplate the enlightening powers of art and cinema, revealing an appreciation for mysterious objects and transcendental moments, where sensations and places are privileged over plots and certainty is eschewed for the pleasures of the unknown.
 
8:45pm
UNCLE BOONME WHO CAN RECALL HIS PAST LIVES
Apichatpong Weerasethkul (2010) 114 mins – M
“No one else is making films this exciting and challenging” (Steve Erickson). Weerasethkul’s audacious winner of the 2010 Cannes Palme d’Or centres on the last few days of the title character as he is joined by those he has loved and lost and contemplates his karmically charged past lives. Moving fluidly between the living and the dead, reality and dream, this uncanny, serene and truly borderless work is also the final instalment in Weerasethkul’s “Primitive” art project exploring the Isan region in northeast Thailand. One of the key films of the 2010s.
 
July 8
AT HOME IN THE WORLD: CECIL HOLMES, ACTIVIST FILMMAKER
Although born in New Zealand, Cecil Holmes (1921-1994) is one of the most significant and ambitious filmmakers to work in Australia during the 1950s, ’60s and ’70s. A dedicated leftist, his work consistently demonstrated a humanist commitment to the socially disenfranchised, ranging from the underlying capitalist conditions that force decent citizens into bushranging and stealing to the social and economic conditions confronting Indigenous communities in contemporary Australia (the latter works often made in collaboration with his wife, anthropologist and activist Sandra Le Brun Holmes). In the 1950s, Holmes briefly moved from his background in documentary to feature-film production, but all of his work shares a deep concern for social justice, place and the precarious fate of displaced and dispossessed peoples in the modern world. Although he is often regarded as a maverick director who struggled to make films Holmes consistently produced challenging work for a variety of governmental, corporate and philanthropic organisations, as well as at the behest of such individuals as Australian leftist author, Frank Hardy.
 
Wednesday July 8
7:00pm
THREE IN ONE
Cecil Holmes (1957) 89 mins – G
Holmes’ opus is one of the most significant films made in Australian before the 1970s revival. A profoundly independent work that robustly demonstrates Holmes’ filmmaking capabilities as well as his qualities as a cinephile and political artist (Henry Lawson and Frank Hardy are both sources), it reframes the common theme of “mateship” within explicitly leftist contexts and provides an indelible portrait of Australia from the 1890s to the 1950s. Preceded by Words for Freedom Cecil Holmes (1956) 19 mins – Unclassified 15 +. Holmes’ fugue of Henry Lawson, union chronicle and folk-tale provides a history of the Australian workers press. Prints of both films courtesy of the National Film and Sound Archive, Australia.
 
9:00pm
CAPTAIN THUNDERBOLT AND OTHER TALES
Cecil Holmes (1948-1968) 99 mins – Unclassified 15 +
This program covers a range of Holmes’ work in documentary and fiction, moving from his pioneering films for the New Zealand National Film Unit such as The Coaster (1948) to his groundbreaking and socially committed work with Indigenous communities: The Islanders (1968). Its centrepiece is his bold and visually adventurous first feature, Captain Thunderbolt (1953), an expansive and exciting account of the social, political and economic conditions that lead to bushranging. Only surviving in its edited 16mm TV version, it provides an urgent reminder of the crucial role of the archive. Prints courtesy of the National Film and Sound Archive, Australia and ACMI Collections. To be introduced by film scholar and Captain Thunderbolt devotee, David Donaldson, inaugural director of the Sydney Film Festival.
 
July 15-29
HIROSHI SHIMIZU: FORGOTTEN MASTER
Making his directorial debut in 1924 at the age of 21, Hiroshi Shimizu (1903–1966) went on to make over 160 films in a career contemporaneous with widely acknowledged masters Yasujiro Ozu and Kenji Mizoguchi, in whose critical shadows he often, undeservedly, resided. The warmth and lightness of his work has always been highly praised but, as Alexander Jacoby notes, he shares with Jean Renoir the double-edged nature of such plaudits: “Those few critics who have written about Shimizu’s work tend to make him sound less interesting than he is.” Chris Fujiwara notes several key recurrent elements in the director’s work, including: a resistance to plotting; anarchy and unpredictability; “the expressive possibilities of camera movement”; and the subversion of the couple. Shimizu’s world is one where the actions of the individual character defines them. He is also often overtly condemnatory of restrictive social structures and institutional norms. His films repeatedly focus on those excluded from mainstream society – “fallen women”, itinerant workers, those with disabilities or children. But, despite his concern with serious subject matter, Shimizu always retained an open approach to filmmaking. David Bordwell describes how he wrote only vague screenplays, making up new dialogue as required, and “rarely budged from his chair on set, even when the camera was moving”. This season of rarely screened 35mm prints, focusing on films from the golden period of 1930s Japanese cinema, reveals a filmmaker of generosity and casual precision. Working with a roster of Shochiku’s finest contracted actors, including Kinuyo Tanaka, Shin Saburi and Chishu Ryu, Shimizu created a body of work that deserves to be regarded as among the best cinema of its era.
 
Wednesday July 15
7:00pm
ORNAMENTAL HAIRPIN
Hiroshi Shimizu (1941) 70 mins – Unclassified 15 +
Ozu regular Chishu Ryu plays a soldier who stabs his foot on a hairpin at a rural spa before finding hesitant romance with its owner (the legendary Kinuyo Tanaka). Shimizu’s poignant, ineffably light romance includes a generous ensemble of spa residents watching on, willing the lead couple to overcome their reticence. Not well-received by a highly imperialist country about to enter World War II, when militaristic propaganda was the literal order of the day, Shimizu’s understated humanism, elegant tracking shots and playful optimism marked a very particular kind of rebellion. 35mm print courtesy of the National Film Archive of Japan.
 
8:20pm
THE MASSEURS AND THE LADY
Hiroshi Shimizu (1938) 66 mins – Unclassified 15 +
Two wisecracking blind masseurs, a mysterious woman on the run, a travelling salesman and his nephew are brought together by happenstance at a remote mountain resort in Shimizu’s disarmingly funny film. As a love triangle develops – and a spate of bath-house thefts is investigated – this elegantly meandering exploration of love and loneliness weaves in and out of interconnected stories, offering shifting perspectives on human connection in pre-war Japan. 35mm print courtesy of the Japan Foundation.
 
9:35pm
FORGET LOVE FOR NOW
Hiroshi Shimizu (1937) 73 mins – Unclassified 15 +
Drawing upon recurring themes that mark much of his work, Shimizu again focuses his lens on the lives of unhappy children and women, particularly mothers, burdened by societal restrictions, prejudices and straitened economic circumstances. In a film reminiscent of specific Ozu films of the 1930s like I Was Born But…, Shimizu explores the tragic implications of a dignified single mother forced to become a bar hostess and the devastating impact this has on the life of her son. 35mm print courtesy of the National Film Archive of Japan.
 
Wednesday July 22
7:00pm
ECLIPSE
Hiroshi Shimizu (1934) 100 mins – Unclassified 15 +
Although Shimizu was dubbed a “genius” by Ozu and Mizoguchi, and is now widely celebrated for his portraits of the lives of disaffected children and women, he was also an incisive and critical chronicler of his times. Tracing the paths of two villagers as they separate in their hometown and move to Tokyo independently, Shimizu’s penetrating film is a chronicle of traditional Japan and its displacement by modernity. Although not openly critical of the rise of militarism it paints a bittersweet vision of lost values. 35mm print courtesy of the National Film Archive of Japan.
 
8:50pm
NOTES OF AN ITINERANT PERFORMER
Hiroshi Shimizu (1941) 98 mins – Unclassified 15 +
One of Shimizu’s least political works, tempered by the restricted filmmaking conditions on the cusp of the World War II, tells the story of a travelling performer (Yaeko Mizutani) who seeks to reinvent herself by moving in with the family of a kindly tea merchant. Demonstrating Shimizu’s extraordinary technical proficiency and relentless innovation, this minimalist drama touches on social issues during the Meiji Era such as hardships faced by women and class differences, ending in an ambiguous resolution of the romantic couple. 35mm print courtesy of the National Film Archive of Japan.
 
Wednesday July 29
7:00pm
MR. THANK YOU
Hiroshi Shimizu (1936) 75 mins – Unclassified 15 +
The problems of Depression-era Japan are canvassed through a day in the life of a bus driver – nicknamed “Mr. Thank You” for his exceedingly polite manner – and the passengers he collects on an extended route from rural Izu to inner-city Tokyo. Adapted from Nobel Prize-winning novelist Yasunari Kawabata’s (A Page of Madness) story, this precursor to Italian neorealism was entirely shot on location and largely improvised. Featuring Michiko Kuwano and Ken Uehara and wonderful cinematography by Isamu Aoki. 35mm print courtesy of the National Film Archive of Japan.
 
8:25pm
A HERO OF TOKYO
Hiroshi Shimizu (1935) 63 mins – Unclassified 15 +
Shimizu’s final silent film is a deeply ironic and profoundly distilled treatise on the poor status of women in 1930s Japan. Abandoned by her corrupt second husband, Haruko (Mitsuko Yoshikawa) becomes a hostess in order to support her three children, a decision that has a profound impact on their subsequent lives. Shimizu’s subversive critique of Japanese militarism and ingrained attitudes to class, tradition and sexuality provides an incisive portrait of an increasingly conservative society. 35mm print courtesy of the National Film Archive of Japan.
 
9:40pm
A WOMAN CRYING IN SPRING
Hiroshi Shimizu (1933) 78 mins – Unclassified 15 +
Shimizu’s first sound film is an emotionally powerful melodrama about the love between an itinerant woman and a miner who meet in a rugged, far-flung region of Japan. One of the director’s darkest and most revelatory works, the film evinces Shimizu’s affinity with those on society’s margins. Partly shot on location against the beautiful snowy landscapes of Hokkaido, it features an innovative use of audio: overheard voices provide a chorus to the romantic theme, while folk songs echo throughout, taking on a deeper significance with each repetition. 35mm print courtesy of the National Film Archive of Japan.
 
September 2-16
JEAN COCTEAU: THE POETRY OF DREAMS
A truly diverse, influential and mercurial artist, Jean Cocteau (1889-1963) approached everything he made with the vision of a poet. Exploring the porous boundaries between fairy-tale, memory, dream, everyday life, death, masculine, feminine and queer sexuality, Cocteau’s pioneering lyrical and avant-garde work spanned many fields including writing, poetry, painting, design, criticism, acting and directing. He was a polymath who regarded beauty as the ultimate goal to which all of his work should strive. Mixing personal with classical mythology, while openly exploring his own homosexuality, he “set Greek tragedy to the rhythm of our times”. Born to a prominent family in a small town outside Paris, he became associated with writers such as Proust, Apollinaire and Gide when in his early 20s. His integration into the fervent artistic social scene in Paris in the 1910s and 1920s, led Cocteau to complete a varied slate of work, such as a ballet with designs by Picasso and music by Satie (Parade in 1917), and to undertake many creative collaborations with artists such as his lover, actor Jean Marais, Jean-Pierre Melville, Stravinsky, Colette and many others. Despite his work across many forms and mediums, Cocteau’s major artistic contribution was to the cinema. Directing his first film at age of 40, Le sang d’un poète, Cocteau approached the movie screen as “the true mirror reflecting the flesh and blood of [his] dreams”. This season celebrates Cocteau’s truly singular body of work, incorporating all of his key films including his extraordinary collaboration with Melville (Les enfants terribles), his gorgeous adaptation of La belle et la bête, and his hugely influential “Orphic trilogy”. 
 
Wednesday September 2
7:00pm
ORPHÉE
Jean Cocteau (1950) 95 mins – PG
This intensely personal reworking of the Orpheus legend is probably Cocteau’s most influential cinematic achievement. He uses reverse slow-motion and negative images to suggest the Underworld, while the ordinary domestic life of Mr and Mrs Orpheus is filmed realistically, elaborating the theme of the poet caught between real and imaginary worlds. This haunting and visually striking film is amongst the most remarkable attempts to fuse poetry and cinema. Stars Jean Marais, María Casares, François Périer and Juliette Gréco.
 
8:45pm
LES PARENTS TERRIBLES
Jean Cocteau (1948) 105 mins – Unclassified 15 +
Described by Time Out as a “gut wrenching tale of emotional rivalries” and by The Guardian as an “Oedipal farce”, Cocteau’s claustrophobic adaptation of his own play invites a wide spectrum of responses. Five characters, two sets, astonishing close-ups and metronomically precise editing highlight the story of a young man (Jean Marais) who finds himself battling both his parents (Yvonne de Bray and Marcel André), each for vastly different reasons, when he announces that he’s fallen in love. Gabrielle Dorziat and Josette Day round out the ensemble of heightened, stylised performances. Courtesy of the British Film Institute Archive.
 
Wednesday September 9
7:00pm
LA BELLE ET LA BÊTE
Jean Cocteau (1946) 93 mins – PG
This ageless gothic fairy-tale comes fully to life in Cocteau’s magically surreal romantic spectacle. With a dreamlike tone, complete with fantastical inventions, cinematic trickery, and smoke and mirrors, Cocteau’s opus is one of the true landmarks of French cinema. The beautifully detailed costume designs, Henri Alekan’s extraordinarily opulent and fluid cinematography, and Georges Auric’s memorable score are coupled with highly influential effects (René Clément was technical advisor). Jean Marais, Cocteau’s long-time partner and muse, stars as “The Beast”.
 
8:45pm
LES ENFANTS TERRIBLES
Jean-Pierre Melville (1950) 105 mins – Unclassified 15 +
A teenage brother (Edouard Dermithe) and sister’s (Nicole Stéphane) unhealthy obsession with one another leads, inevitably, to suicide. Fatalistic and extraordinarily powerful, Cocteau’s beautiful, otherworldly, profoundly literary script must have seemed virtually unfilmable, but Melville’s precise and poetic cinematic style manages to retain its claustrophobic spirit. Shot mostly at the famed Théâtre Pigalle by Henri Decaë, this is a key work of postwar French cinema. 35mm courtesy of the British Film Institute Archive.
 
Wednesday September 16
7:00pm
LE TESTAMENT D’ORPHÉE
Jean Cocteau (1960) 79 mins – PG
Mixing life and death, present and future, nightmare and dream, the third part of Cocteau’s “Orphic trilogy” is a summation of the artist’s works and preoccupations. Cocteau as The Poet wanders weightlessly through a dream landscape peopled by his friends, collaborators, characters and images from his films, including María Casares, Jean Marais, Pablo Picasso, Françoise Sagan, Charles Aznavour, Jean-Pierre Léaud, Brigitte Bardot, Edouard Dermithe and Yul Brynner.
 
8:30pm
LE SANG D’UN POÈTE
Jean Cocteau (1930) 55 mins – Unclassified 15 +
“Every poem is a coat of arms. It must be deciphered.” So begins Cocteau’s decadent and sensual first feature, a subversively autobiographical work that mines his own history as an accomplished artist to contemplate the sometimes-tortured relationship between creator and creation. Cocteau conjures indelible images of life, death and dreams in this free-associative, sensorial and homoerotic dance, establishing the vividly surrealist sensibility that defines the director’s later films.
 
9:35pm
JEAN COCTEAU: AUTOPORTRAIT D’UN INCONNU
Edgardo Cozarinsky (1983) 66 mins – Unclassified 15 +
Cozarinsky’s first-person documentary shows Cocteau recounting his artistic life in post-World War I Paris and highlights his encounters with such figures as Diaghilev, Nijinsky, Picasso, Jean Renoir and Stravinsky. A compilation of material featuring moments from various Cocteau films and collaborations such as Les enfants terribles, Argentinian writer-filmmaker Cozarinsky’s evocative “autoportrait” is one of a series of seminal works on the cinema made by the director. Print courtesy of ACMI Collections.
 
September 23-30
QUEERING THE ARCHIVE: THE CINEMA OF BARBARA HAMMER
Over a career spanning 50 years and more than 80 moving-image works, American filmmaker and visual artist Barbara Hammer (1939-2019) initiated a new kind of cinema made from a distinctively female and lesbian perspective, challenging the assumptions of mainstream culture and opening a discourse for marginalised groups in society. Her personal and experimental films sought to inspire social change and make largely invisible bodies, images and histories seen. After coming out as lesbian in the 1970s, Hammer took off on a motorcycle with a Super 8 camera and created the groundbreaking Dyketactics, one of the first films to show uncompromising lesbian sexuality. Hammer proceeded to experiment with a variety of avant-garde media and multi-modal styles to deconstruct heteronormative cinema and create unique works on a variety of topics that are unapologetically honest, undeniably political and beautifully life-affirming. As So Mayer claims, “Hammer defined lesbian cinema almost single-handed…. Her generosity of spirit, intellect and embodiment lives on in the films she made that changed the landscape not only of cinema, but of our queer lives and histories.” This tribute includes a broad range of Hammer’s eclectic shorts and features from across her career dealing with diverse themes including the lesbian experience (Dyketactics, Superdyke, Women I Love), lesbian histories (Nitrate Kisses, The Female Closet, History Lessons, Audience), menstruation (Menses), concepts of time and space (Bent Time, Maya Deren’s Sink), endangered species and artistic forms (Endangered), and ageing and death (A Horse is Not a Metaphor, Vital Signs).
 
Wednesday September 23
7:00pm
NITRATE KISSES
Barbara Hammer (1992) 67 mins – R 18 +
Hammer’s first feature recontextualises material from the 1933 landmark queer film Lot in Sodom within an optically manipulated fretwork of associative montage also appropriating excerpts from 1930s German fiction films and of three couples making love. This palimpsest of representations of homosexual life found in the margins and outtakes of cinema history powerfully confronts heteronormative images of sexual and erotic love. Preceded by Endangered Barbara Hammer (1988) 18 mins – Unclassified 15 +. A materialist reflection on the threatened tradition of experimental filmmaking. Prints of both films courtesy of the National Film and Sound Archive, Australia.
 
8:35pm
SUPERDYKES! THE EARLY FILMS OF BARBARA HAMMER
Barbara Hammer (1974-1976) 49 mins – Unclassified 15 +
This collection of four short works made by Hammer in the mid-1970s centres on the form and experiences of the female body, notably addressing topics like queer sexuality and menstruation. Drawing on an avant-garde film process, Hammer gives expression to a lesbian aesthetic and defines not just her own career, but a movement. These works, including Superdyke (1975) and Women I Love (1976), explore hidden lesbian histories, the politics of being gay and the experience of being a woman. Prints of Dyketactics courtesy of the National Film and Sound Archive, Australia.
 
9:35pm
HISTORY LESSONS
Barbara Hammer (2000) 66 mins – Unclassified 15 +
Hammer’s final instalment in the “invisible histories” trilogy surveys and disputes the negative historical depiction of lesbians by the medical, educational, religious and legal establishments, alongside pornography and the media. The juxtaposition of archival documentary footage with early lesbian cinema and cabaret songs provides an audacious reaffirmation of queer subversion and appropriation. Print courtesy of the National Film and Sound Archive, Australia.
 
Wednesday September 30
7:00pm
PROJECTING LIGHT AND BENDING TIME: BARBARA HAMMER IN THE 1980s
Barbara Hammer (1982-1983) 55 mins – Unclassified 15 +
This program of two of Hammer’s most celebrated and searching films of the 1980s includes: Audience (1982), a diary of audience reactions to retrospectives of Hammer’s work in San Francisco, London, Toronto and Montreal; and Bent Time (1983), a work inspired by the scientific theory that time can bend like light curving at the universe’s outer edges. Hammer uses an extreme wide-angle lens and “one frame of film per foot of physical space” to capture high-energy, mystical and scientific sites across the United States.
 
8:05pm
THE FEMALE CLOSET
Barbara Hammer (1998) 59 mins – Unclassified 15 +
A fascinating collage of archival photographs, home movies and interviews exploring the lesbian histories of women artists across the 20th century: Victorian photographer Alice Austen, German Dada collagist Hannah Höch, and contemporary painter Nicole Eisenman. A careful examination of the museum as “closet”, and a thoughtful lesson on the importance of creating and archiving feminist artwork. Preceded by Sisters! Barbara Hammer (1973) 8 mins. A vital landmark in feminist and lesbian filmmaking documenting, amongst other things, the first Women’s International Day march in San Francisco.
 
9:15pm
CORPOREAL HISTORY: THE LATE WORKS OF BARBARA HAMMER
Barbara Hammer (1991-2011) 69 mins – Unclassified 15 +
A trio of films that reflect on and revise concepts around death and cultural history. Vital Signs (1991) is an ethereal, experimental refraction of a danse macabre. Maya Deren’s Sink (2011) pays tribute Deren’s foundational work, immersed in the spaces in which it was created. A Horse is Not a Metaphor (2008) is a powerful, rhythmic and meditative response to Hammer’s cancer diagnosis and chemotherapy treatment. The two later films received the Teddy Award for Best Short Film at the Berlinale.
 
October 7-14
GALLOWS BACCHANALIAS, FRACTIOUS FAIRY-TALES AND THE RULE OF THREE: THE CINEMA OF JURAJ JAKUBISKO
The irrepressible Juraj Jakubisko (1938-) represents the baroque vanguard of the Czechoslovak New Wave’s Slovak contingent. After assisting on early works by fellow students Jaromil Jireš and Věra Chytilová at Prague’s FAMU film school, Jakubisko soon made his own mark with a succession of acclaimed, flamboyant and provocative films which saw him dubbed “the Slovak Fellini” at the Venice Film Festival of 1968, but which also earnt him the sustained wrath of his nation’s censors, with three of his four 1960s features shelved until after 1989’s Velvet Revolution, including the extraordinary Birds, Orphans and Fools that opens this season. His similarly exuberant contemporary Elo Havetta said: “Jakubisko was the first to show that folklore is something more than songs and dances – a living tradition.” Moreover, his ludic, carnivalesque cinema – a clear influence on latter-day FAMU alumni, Emir Kusturica – is also steeped in magic realism, symbolism and intertextuality and has habitually been highly engaged with the often-precarious times in which it was made. This season of imported prints principally focuses on the director’s key short and feature-length works from the 1960s to the close of the 1980s, which typically position their lead characters in manic, triangular relationships amid trying times, but also includes the sumptuous fairy-tale Perinbaba starring Giulietta Masina, emphasising Jakubisko’s great affinity with Federico Fellini, on- and off-screen.
 
Wednesday October 7
7:00pm
BIRDS, ORPHANS AND FOOLS
Juraj Jakubisko (1969) 78 mins – Unclassified 15 +
Shot under highly straitened circumstances, and featuring astonishing cinematography from Igor Luther and a score by the great Zdeněk Liška, Jakubisko’s third feature is a mosaic-like parable set in an undefined space and time. Nonetheless, its crazy world without ideals, and filled with violence, cynicism and hopelessness, surely references Czechoslovakia after August 1968. Digital restoration. Preceded by The Red Cross Drummer Juraj Jakubisko (1977) 13 mins – Unclassified 15 +. This hallucinatory short promotional film for the Czechoslovak Red Cross is amongst its director’s most radical works. Prints of both films courtesy of the Slovak Film Institute.
 
8:45pm
SITTING ON A BRANCH, ENJOYING MYSELF
Juraj Jakubisko (1989) 110 mins – Unclassified 15 +
Jakubisko’s dreamlike, tragicomic final film to be made under the failing communist regime (albeit a West German co-production) dared to explicitly tackle – and, moreover, burlesque – the Stalinist era. Aesthetically and thematically echoing Birds, Orphans and Fools from 20 years prior, and with glorious cinematography from Laco Kraus, it concerns another trio of outsiders who unite to establish an unorthodox household and keep at bay the world’s madness – here, in the chaotic immediate aftermath of World War II, in an abandoned Jewish bakery. Digital print courtesy of the Slovak Film Institute.
 
Wednesday October 14
7:00pm
PERINBABA
Juraj Jakubisko (1985) 89 mins – Unclassified 15 +
This beautiful adaptation of a Brothers Grimm fairy-tale has become a staple of Slovak Christmases, notwithstanding its plentiful adult content, horrific elements and that it was only made because its director was forbidden from producing more personal projects. Giulietta Masina shines as Perinbaba, aka “Lady Winter”, the “Feather Fairy”, in this tale of a young boy whose life she saved who wishes to leave her enchanted domain for the real world, notwithstanding the latter’s many terrors. Jakubisko steeped this cult classic in Slavic folklore; the breathtaking cinematography is by Dodo Šimončič. Digital print courtesy of the Slovak Film Institute.
 
8.40pm
THE PRIME OF LIFE
Juraj Jakubisko (1967) 95 mins – Unclassified 15 +
Abetted by the brilliant Igor Luther’s grainy, overexposed black-and-white cinematography, Jakubisko’s inventive, existential, semi-autobiographical debut feature “signaled not only the birth of an exceptional talent, but also the birth of a Slovak style” (Mira and Antonín J. Liehm). Two brothers in their early 30s establish, through their absurdist games, that life is made up of “love, foolishness and death”. Digital print courtesy of the Slovak Film Institute. Preceded by Waiting for Godot Juraj Jakubisko (1966) 29 mins – Unclassified 15 +. Wholly set around a party, Jakubisko’s Godardian graduation film is supremely evocative of its time. Digital print courtesy of the National Film Archive in Prague.
 
October 21-November 4
REACHING BEYOND THE FRAME: THE POETIC CINEMA OF ABBAS KIAROSTAMI
When essayist and critic Phillip Lopate claimed that “we are living in the Age of Kiarostami, as once we did in the Age of Godard”, he highlighted both the crucial emergence onto the world stage of Iranian cinema and the specific qualities of Kiarostami’s contemplative, gently questioning, porously self-reflexive and overwhelmingly poetic work. Abbas Kiarostami (1940-2016) began making films at the start of the 1970s for the Institute for the Intellectual Development of Children and Young Adults in Tehran after working in graphic design, book illustration and TV commercials. From his very first short films and features such as The Experience and The Traveller he developed a highly identifiable style and set of philosophical and materialist concerns focusing on the relationship between art and everyday life, the importance of education and pedagogy to the foundations of culture and society, the invisible barrier between documentary and fiction, and the world beyond the frame. Working consistently throughout the 1970s and 1980s on either side of the Islamic Revolution, his films came to international prominence with the unfolding release of the quietly phenomenal “Koker trilogy” – Where is the Friend’s House?, And Life Goes On, Through the Olive Trees – an extraordinary run of movies focusing on a small rural community recovering from the effects of a devastating earthquake, each “internalising” the fictional and documentary worlds of its predecessor. This specially imported season focuses on the films Kiarostami made prior to his Palme d’Or winning opus, Taste of Cherry, profiling a range of rarely seen but extraordinary early to mid-career features and documentaries that have only recently been restored, and providing further evidence of the director’s vaunted reputation as one of the key figures of post-World War II cinema.
 
Wednesday October 21
7:00pm
WHERE IS THE FRIEND’S HOUSE?
Abbas Kiarostami (1987) 87 mins – Unclassified 15 +
The first instalment of Kiarostami’s deeply humanist “Koker trilogy” is a touching parable and revealing portrait of rural Iranian society. Kiarostami depicts the adventures of the everyday from the perspective of a schoolboy who, zigzagging through two villages to return his friend’s homework book, is waylaid by the demands of adults. A highly sympathetic, poetic and profound film about the meaning of responsibility and the lives of ordinary people presented in neorealist style with a twist of magic realism.
 
8:40pm
HOMEWORK
Abbas Kiarostami (1989) 74 mins – Unclassified 15 +
This formally rigorous documentary is mostly comprised of footage of Iranian primary-school students talking about their homework, lives in school and families. With sensitivity and good humour, Kiarostami draws out, in stealthily heartbreaking fashion, the challenges imposed by war and politics on children. This astoundingly resonant meditation on conformity and imposed religiosity was the last he completed for the Institute for the Intellectual Development of Children and Young Adults.
 
10:05pm
A WEDDING SUIT
Abbas Kiarostami (1976) 54 mins – Unclassified 15 +
A tailor’s apprentice is pressured by two friends, in order to impress a girl on a date, to “borrow” the bespoke suit ordered by a rich lady for her son. Kiarostami’s adroitly comic and suspenseful featurette grounds its hijinks in a cogent, neorealist-tinged observation of class divisions in pre-Revolutionary Iran and the adolescent dream of adulthood.
 
Wednesday October 28
7:00pm
THROUGH THE OLIVE TREES
Abbas Kiarostami (1994) 103 mins – Unclassified 15 +
From the moment it opens with the “director” auditioning young women for the film we are about to see, Kiarostami’s breakthrough third entry in the “Koker trilogy” establishes a magically porous border between documentary and fiction, real life and cinema. Focusing on the filming of a few scenes from And Life Goes On, and gently observing the impact of a deadly earthquake on the local community, it foregrounds the profoundly contemplative sensibility of the director’s best work. Its sublime concluding long take is one of the defining moments in Kiarostami’s cinema.
 
8:45pm
THE EXPERIENCE
Abbas Kiarostami (1973) 60 mins – Unclassified 15 +
Kiarostami’s first long-from work is a delicate tale of young love in Iran, chronicled against a backdrop of class divisions prior to the Islamic Revolution. Largely composed of vignettes of silence, this is a minimalist life portrait filtered through documentary-style location photography of Tehran. Within its simple narrative, Kiarostami explores his experimental approach to film structure, appearing here in its most essential form. It is, according to Richard Brody, “the most intricate of his short features”.
 
9:55pm
FELLOW CITIZEN
Abbas Kiarostami (1983) 53 mins – Unclassified 15 +
Kiarostami’s first long-form work to be produced after the Islamic Revolution is a characteristically intense documentary portrait of a traffic cop attempting to restrict access to drivers in the centre of Tehran. Using a telephoto lens, and depicting the notoriously hectic rhythm of life in Tehran as well as combative exchanges with motorists, this ambivalent depiction of a figure plucked from the city’s ebb-and-flow draws upon Kiarostami’s youthful employment as a traffic cop.
 
Wednesday November 4
7:00pm
FIRST GRADERS
Abbas Kiarostami (1985) 82 mins – Unclassified 15 +
Kiarostami’s first feature-length documentary presents a devilishly amusing series of candid interviews with hot-headed, rebellious and tardy first graders who’ve been sent to the principal’s office for bad behaviour. The film balances the interrogation of the students with an empathetic insight into the role of the headmaster and the fundamental problem of discipline. Prefiguring future directions in Kiarostami’s cinema, the film evolves into a narrative of one student’s anxiety about their first day of school.
 
8:35pm
FIRST CASE, SECOND CASE
Abbas Kiarostami (1979) 53 mins – Unclassified 15 +
Kiarostami’s pedagogical exercise, initially shot before the Revolution, shows a teacher progressively banishing boys from the classroom until someone owns up to being the cause of a disruption. Reworked to present two scenarios – one where the boys maintain solidarity, one where a student names the culprit – Kiarostami presents the episodes for comment to key figures of the new Islamic regime, including the infamous “hanging judge”, Sadeq Khalkhali, Chief Justice of the Revolutionary Court.
 
9:40pm
THE TRAVELLER
Abbas Kiarostami (1974) 73 mins – Unclassified 15 +
Kiarostami’s first feature is the most widely seen and highly regarded of his early films, setting the thematic and stylistic template that would preoccupy him for much of his career. Following a mercenary young protagonist who is determined to journey to Tehran to see a football match, it turns on an extraordinarily candid portrayal of small-town life, the minute neorealist detail encountered on the journey, a deceptively simple situation, and a bracingly unsentimental vision of childhood.
 
November 11-25
BORSCHT, SAUERKRAUT, GOULASH AND LEMONADE: AN INTRODUCTION TO OSTERNS AND RED WESTERNS
It may come as a surprise to many, but that most quintessentially American of genres, the western, was enormously popular behind the Iron Curtain. Of course it was seldom possible for Eastern Bloc audiences to see films produced in Hollywood. No matter; even though they deemed the Hollywood western decadent in exemplifying and propagating the United States’ foundational frontier myths, socialist states took to the production of westerns with great relish. Two subgeneric traditions comprise the extraordinary corpus that entailed, inevitably granted culinary-inspired monikers linked to the country of production – “borscht” westerns from the Soviet Union, “sauerkraut” from East Germany, “goulash” from Hungary. “Osterns” transposed western generic topoi upon lands Sovietised at the time of production, often setting their action during the Russian Revolution or amid the opening of new Eastern European frontiers in the wake of either World War, while “red westerns” utilised local environments as stand-ins for the American west, situating their action in America but subjecting it to revisionist ideological agendas, or even satire. Combined, osterns and red westerns stand in fascinating dialogue not only with classical Hollywood westerns and their revisionist variations, but also with those films produced in parallel with them in Western Europe, such as the Italian spaghetti western, which they rival in aesthetic and thematic innovation. This season of wholly imported prints offers a grand primer in the Eastern western, offering six key features spanning the gamut of the genre, boosted by three Lemonade Joe-inspired animated shorts which further testify to the Cold War-era East’s paradoxical affinity for all things western.
 
Wednesday November 11
7:00pm
AT HOME AMONG STRANGERS
Nikita Mikhalkov (1974) 93 mins – Unclassified 15 +
This legendary, action-packed, Brezhnev-era ostern, set just after the Russian Civil War, represents Mikhalkov’s bravura feature-film directorial debut; he also enjoys a starring role. Pavel Lebeshev’s cinematography alternates colour sequences with black and white, while Eduard Artemyev’s Morricone-inspired score bestows a spaghetti western flavour upon the Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid-styled proceedings – except here the anti-heroes are, of course, card-carrying communists. 35mm print courtesy of Gosfilmofond. Preceded by Cowboy Jimmy Dušan Vukotić (1957) 13 mins – Unclassified 15 +. A classic cartoon in which a western hero spills out of the silver screen, only to have his mettle tested in the real world. Print courtesy of Zagreb Film.
 
9.00pm
THE WIND BLOWS UNDER YOUR FEET
György Szomjas (1976) 90 mins – Unclassified 15 +
The first of Szomjas’ two stylish, violent, Leone-influenced “goulash” westerns transposes genre tropes onto the quintessentially Hungarian puszta landscapes familiar from the cinema of Miklós Jancsó. Set in the 1830s, it concerns the antagonism between an outlaw (charismatic Bulgarian actor Đoko Rosić) and a sheriff (István Bujtor – the Hungarian Bud Spencer) against a backdrop of canalisation threatening both of their traditional ways of life. With striking cinematography from Elémer Ragályi and a plaintive folk score by Ferenc Sebő. Digital print courtesy of the Hungarian National Film Archive.
 
Wednesday November 18
7:00pm
NOBODY WANTED TO DIE
Vytautas Žalakevičius (1966) 100 mins – Unclassified 15 +
Details to follow
 
 
8:50pm
THE SONS OF GREAT BEAR
Josef Mach (1966) 93 mins – Unclassified 15 +
An East German “sauerkraut” western directed by a Czech communist, with Serbian actor Gojko Mitić cast in the lead role as a Lakota resistance fighter betrayed by white settlers, this is the first of DEFA’s audaciously revisionist “red westerns”. With the mountains of Montenegro standing in for the Black Hills of South Dakota, Mach turns the cowboys-and-Indians trope on its head to critique the mythology of the west, expose the lie of Manifest Destiny and offer a coded indictment of Cold War-era American imperialism. 35mm print courtesy of DEFA-Filmverleih.
 
Wednesday November 25
7:00pm
A MAN FROM THE BOULEVARD DES CAPUCINES
Alla Surikova (1987) 99 mins – Unclassified 15 +
This remarkable, extremely popular, late-communist era red western is a rarity for being one of the few entries in the genre directed by a woman. Surikova’s film is also an unusually self-reflexive affair, and an uproarious comedy, deconstructing the mythology of the western as it also unravels its own making. Shot in Crimea, it concerns a zealous cinematographer’s (Andrei Mironov) fin de siècle visit to the fictional Wild West town of Santa Carolina to propagate Paris’ new sensation, cinema, and its putative morally uplifting qualities. 35mm print courtesy of Gosfilmofond.
 
8.50pm            
LEMONADE JOE
Oldřich Lipský (1964) 95 mins – Unclassified 15 +
In this enduring cult comedy, Lipský and co-writer Jiří Brdečka draw on the latter’s serialised stories and plays to satirise the Golden age of the western, as well as the competing ideologies of the West and the East. An all-star cast grace this relentlessly inventive, colour-tinted CinemaScope parody of the virtuous, crooning cowboy B-westerns of Gene Autry and Tex Ritter. Preceded by Song of the Prairie Jiří Trnka (1949) 23 mins – Unclassified 15 +. Trnka’s brilliant puppet animation is the first screen adaptation of Lemonade Joe. 35mm prints of both films courtesy of the National Film Archive in Prague.
 
December 2-16
THE LAND IS OURS: YOUSSEF CHAHINE
Born into a multilingual family in cosmopolitan Alexandria, Egypt, Youssef Chahine (1926-2008) quickly emerged as one of the key figures of Arab cinema, a courageous nationalist and humanist whose work ranges across the musical, melodrama, comedy, the historical epic and highly cinematic forms of autobiography. Educated in theatre and TV in California, Chahine returned to Egypt to work in publicity for 20th Century-Fox before starting his directorial career as a 23-year-old in 1950. With the fall of the Egyptian monarchy and the rise to power of Arab nationalist Gamal Abdel Nasser in 1952, Chahine’s work increasingly fused together popular forms of entertainment with social, cultural and political themes. Chahine was central in launching the career of Omar Sharif, and his reputation was made by the release of the exuberant, bittersweet, neorealist Cairo Station in 1958. His vaunted subsequent reputation rests on a series of pan-Arab, pro-reform and explicitly nationalist films he made in the 1960s such as Saladin and The Land, movies that light on the struggle of peasants and peoples against feudal landlords and foreign invaders, as well as the quartet of autobiographical works he made in the final three decades of his career. Directing over 40 films across six decades, Chahine’s sometimes controversially secular cinema reveals a committed, deeply cinephilic, internationalist, sexually adventurous, explicitly non-fundamentalist and anti-colonial sensibility.
 
Wednesday December 2
7:00pm
CAIRO STATION
Youssef Chahine (1958) 74 mins – Unclassified 15 +
The film that established Chahine’s international reputation. This unbridled psychosexual character study – set entirely in and around Cairo’s central train station – was so shocking it was banned in Egypt for two decades. The director stars as a shy, disabled newspaper vendor whose innocent crush on a lemonade seller (Hind Rostom, the “Marilyn Monroe of Arabia”) slowly evolves into a dangerous obsession. Starting as a textured and humanistic examination of a society experiencing tumultuous social change, it transforms into a mixture of florid melodrama and populist tragedy.
 
8:25pm
THE LAND
Youssef Chahine (1969) 130 mins – Unclassified 15 +
A community of impoverished farmers living on the Nile Delta in the 1930s draw up a petition to stop their exploitation by major landowners and ensure the irrigation of their land. Chahine’s deeply committed and full-blooded agrarian portrait is a potent mix of melodrama, agit-prop and social realism. Widely championed by the Arab left, it is one of Chahine’s most enduring and important films. Adapted from a seminal novel by Abdel Rahman al-Sharqawi published just after Egypt’s 1952 revolution, it gives voice to the defining struggles engulfing the nation.
 
Wednesday December 9
7:00pm
ALEXANDRIA… WHY?
Youssef Chahine (1979) 133 mins – Unclassified 15 +
The first film in Chahine’s “Alexandria quartet” follows a young aspiring director enamoured with Hollywood and privately evaluating his current identity and circumstances. Examining Egypt’s political and social tensions, as well as the country’s contradictory relationship to America, Chahine’s partly autobiographical, highly cinephilic fiction combines archival footage with a fantastical vision of World War II-era Egypt. Sparking controversy and government censorship it won the Silver Bear – Special Jury Prize at the Berlinale.
 
9:25pm
MY ONE AND ONLY LOVE
Youssef Chahine (1957) 110 mins – Unclassified 15 +
Fondly remembered as one of the funniest and most energetic of all Egyptian musicals, this critically overlooked Chahine feature presents the filmmaker at his most brazenly entertaining. A Lubitsch-esque satire about a man and woman forced into a marriage of convenience who gradually fall in love with each other, it marked Chahine’s second and last collaboration with Farid al-Atrash and Shadia, each providing performances that show them at their comic peak. With Hind Rostom.
 
Wednesday December 16
7:00pm
SALADIN
Youssef Chahine (1963) 186 mins – Unclassified 15 +
Chahine’s epic depiction of the titular 12th Century Sultan begins with his armies’ conquest of Jerusalem to counter the persecution of Muslim pilgrims. The ensuing Third Crusade pits his forces against invading European Christians led by Richard the Lionheart. Often seen as an allegory of, or tribute to, Egypt’s heroic pan-Arabist President Gamal Abdel Nasser, an angle no doubt accentuated by the filmmakers to secure the co-operation of the Egyptian Government and military in the production of such a hugely expensive, widescreen spectacle. The film is remarkable for the way it captures the fervent, post-colonialist spirit of the times, an Arab world looking to counter then prevalent Hollywood international historical blockbusters with an alternative narrative while emulating their grand, overblown style.